Adds post "Text formatting in C++ using libc++". (#38)
llvm/llvm-blog-www: content/posts/2022-08-14-libc++-format.md

is very verbose due to the stream manipulators.
The other option is using ``printf``. This makes it easy to format text nicely,
but it only supports a limited number of types and is not extendable. A non
standard option is using the [{fmt}](https://fmt.dev/latest/index.html)
library. Parts of this library are in C++20 as ``std::format``. In this article
there is a short introduction to ``std::format`` and its implementation status
in libc++15.

## What is ``std::format``

``std::format`` is a text formatting library using format strings similar to
Python's [format](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#str.format)
and extensible for user defined types.

```cpp
#include <format>
#include <iostream>

int main() {
  std::cout << std::format("Hello {} in C++{}", "std::format", 20);
}
```
Writes the following output:
```
Hello std::format in C++20
```

The ``{}`` indicates a replacement field like ``%`` in ``printf``. In
``std::format`` the argument types are known, so it is not required to specify
them in the replacement field.

There is support to specify the wanted output format, and select which
positional argument to use.

> (For brevity, the following examples omit the required includes.)

Author: I changed `{}` element to replacement field, and kept the rest of the suggestion.

  };

  for (auto input: inputs) {
    std::cout << std::format("{:>5} | {}\n", input.text, input.info);
  }
}
```
(Note the column width is intended to look good on a terminal. The author has
observed differences in quality of the output depending on the browser used.)
```
 Text | Description
----- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A | U+0041 { LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A }
    Á | U+00C1 { LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A WITH ACUTE }
    Á | U+0041 U+0301 { LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A } { COMBINING ACUTE ACCENT }
    Ĳ | U+0132 { LATIN CAPITAL LIGATURE IJ }
    Δ | U+0394 { GREEK CAPITAL LETTER DELTA }
    Щ | U+0429 { CYRILLIC CAPITAL LETTER SHCHA }
    א | U+05D0 { HEBREW LETTER ALEF }
    ش | U+0634 { ARABIC LETTER SHEEN }
   〉 | U+3009 { RIGHT-POINTING ANGLE BRACKET }
   界 | U+754C { CJK Unified Ideograph-754C }
   🦄 | U+1F921 { UNICORN FACE }
   👨‍👩‍👧‍👦 | U+1F468 U+200D U+1F469 U+200D U+1F467 U+200D U+1F466 { Family: Man, Woman, Girl, Boy } 
```

A huge benefit of ``std::format`` over ``printf`` is its type safety.
When attempting to format a string as a number, it will result in a compilation

> failure.

Author: consteval is introduced in C++20. I'm not convinced that detail is really required. I keep it since it might get people interested in consteval, which is a very nice language feature.

  std::cout << std::format("{0:#08B}, {0:#08o}, {0:08}, {0:#08X}", "15");
```

Next to formatting to a string it is possible to format:

  -  to an output iterator,
```cpp
int main() {
  std::format_to(
    std::ostream_iterator<char>(std::cout, ""),
    "Hello {} in C++{}\n", "std::format", 20);
}
```
  - determine the output size,

```cpp
int main() {
  std::cout << std::formatted_size("Hello {} in C++{}\n", "std::format", 20);
}
```
```
27
```
 - or limit the size of the output.
```cpp
int main() {
  std::format_to(
    std::ostream_iterator<char>(std::cout, ""),
    11, "Hello {} in C++{}\n", "std::format", 20);
}
```
```
Hello std
```

An example of formatting user defined types is available in the standard
library. It has formatting support for the ``chrono`` library. (This is not
available in libc++ yet.)

More examples and details of the specification can be found in this 
[{fmt} cheet sheet](https://hackingcpp.com/cpp/libs/fmt.html).

## The status in libc++15

In libc++15 most of the basic text formatting is complete. All major papers

> have been implemented, but some defect reports are not implemented. Another thing
> the libc++ team wants to work on are performance improvements. Some of these
> improvements have already landed for libc++16, others are planned.  The
> improvements may affect the ABI. Next to our planned changes the C++ committee
> may also vote in an ABI breaking change. The compile-time errors when using an
> invalid format string are not great. This is something which we want to improve
> in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have been implemented, but some defect reports are not implemented. The libc++ team
also wants to work on performance improvements and improvements to the compile-time
errors. Some of these improvements have already landed in ``main`` and will be included
in LLVM 16, while others are only planned.
```

> Since the library is not entirely complete, nor ABI stable, it is shipped in
> the experimental library. To use the code in libc++ you need to compile the
> code like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the library is not entirely complete and the ABI may need to change (due to planned improvements but also changes voted by the C++ Committee), it is shipped as an experimental feature in LLVM 15. To use the code in libc++ you need to compile the code like:
```

```
clang -std=c++20 -stdlib=libc++ -fexperimental-library -ofoo foo.cpp
```

Format support for ``chrono`` is unavailable. Initial work has landed for
libc++16, but none of it is available in libc++15.  The ``chrono`` library
itself lacks support for time zones, leap seconds, and some of the less common
clocks. These need to be available before the formatting support for ``chrono``
can be completed.

## Formatting improvements in C++23

In the examples the output is first formatted in a ``std::string`` before
streaming it to the output.  To avoid the temporary ``std::string`` it is
possible to use ``std::format_to``, but that doesn't have an ergonomic syntax.
In C++23 there will be ``std::print``.
```cpp
int main() {
  std::print("Hello {} in C++{}", "std::format", 20);
}
```
```
Hello std::format in C++20
```

There is little support for formatting containers. In C++23 it will become
possible to format ranges and containers.
```cpp
int main() {
  std::print("{::*^5}", std::vector<int>{1, 2, 3});
}
```
```
[**1**, **2**, **3**]
```

> A start on formatting ranges has been made, but the main focus will be to
> finish C++20's format implementation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some progress on formatting ranges has been made, but the main focus in the short term will be to
finish C++20's format implementation. 
```

## Closing words

> Starting with C++20 formatting text becomes a lot more pleasant and C++23 has
> some nice improvements lined up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with C++20, formatting text becomes a lot more pleasant and C++23 has
even more improvements lined up. This should provide long awaited functionality in
C++ and allow replacing several uses of ``<iostream>`` by a more convenient,
faster and safer alternative.
```

## Acknowledgements

> A huge thanks to Victor Zverovich, the author of {fmt}. He has been heavily
> involved in getting ``std::format`` in the C++ Standard. He has aided reviewing
> libc++'s implementation and his insights and comments have improved the quality
> of the implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Huge thanks to Victor Zverovich, the author of {fmt}. He has been heavily
involved in getting ``std::format`` in the C++ Standard. He has aided reviewing
libc++'s implementation and his insights and comments have improved the quality
of the implementation.
```

---
author: Mark de Wever
date: "2022-09-11"
tags: ["C++", "libc++", "std::format"]
title: Text formatting in C++ using libc++
---

Historically formatting text in C++, using the standard library, has been
unpleasant. It is possible to get nice output with the stream operators, but it
is very verbose due to the stream manipulators. The other option is using
``printf``, which is convenient but only supports a limited number of types and

> is not extendable. A non standard option is using the

Reviewer 2: "non standard" -> "non-standard"?
